# What we can do right now

[List]

[Note]
Donald Trump’s second term is decimating civil rights and democratic norms in the U.S., threatening LGBTQ+ rights [1], [2], immigration [3], [4], [5], the free press [6], free speech [7], academic freedom [8], public health and science [9], [10], [11], flouting constitutional norms all the while aligning with authoritarian regimes [12] [13], challenging the system of judicial and legislative checks and balances [14] [15] , and rolling in grift [16]. (and more: [17]). It’s hard to keep up and it hurts to read the news everyday.
These actions have ripple effects on the rest of the world—emboldening authoritarian leaders, eroding democratic norms in international institutions, and distorting the global information landscape through America's outsized cultural and tech influence. But whether you're an American or a concerned global citizen, there are specific actions we can take right now to stand up for civil rights and democratic values.

Independent of our backgrounds, we can express our dissent publicly - not just on social media but together with our local communities, support individuals and organizations that are being attacked - illegally and unjustly - including with financial or legal aid, counter misinformation and voter disenfranchisement, and refuse to cooperate with illegal and unethical demands.
First, I want to acknowledge that the fear is real. Even as I wrote this, I debated over a hundred times whether to share it, particularly in the face of visa cancellations and student arrests. But that is partly the goal of this administration - and “courage is contagious”. Each of us must of course consider our safety, especially physical safety, but there are many things we can do, without endangering ourselves, to meaningfully support those taking the most heat. I was also inspired by this post that posits the action and agency
It is also easy to be overwhelmed, rather than energized, by all the possibilities for action; my own approach is to identify what I feel most informed about and most agitated about. As an immigrant scientist and a citizen of the “third world”, I am focusing on the attacks on climate monitoring and research, public health and education, against which I can contribute both my voice and money. I’m also horrified by the cruel attacks on vulnerable populations, with the threat of mass deportations and kidnappings, and erasure of trans rights - donating to legal funds and going through “know your rights” brochures.

Another challenge is maintaining momentum beyond engaging in one-time action. Everyone has their own red lines to prevent fatigue and emotional or financial stress. But little actions - like talking to a friend about what they can do or helping someone know their rights - can have a multiplier effect that can, at the level of populations, sustain more time-consuming and large-scale efforts, and still conserve our energy for bigger actions. Try not to be paralyzed by what you are not doing. As a scientist, I often worry about all the approximations and assumptions in my work that limit its scope or correctness - but then I remind myself that this is a collective endeavor and I have to accept humility about my contribution - small but non-zero. The worst thing I could do is do nothing.

A last challenge is to articulate what we are fighting for, not just against. Anger is good for a sprint, but hope is essential for going the distance. And the future cannot just be the status quo that led us to this moment. I don’t think it’s about envisioning a grand plan but at the minimum, a critical reflection on our values, what we want engagement at the local level to look like, and how we can build more compassionate communities.

